Kristin is the daughter of Ken and Debbie Meagher. She has a younger brother,
Brandon, who is finishing college in Atlanta.

Kristin was born in Ottawa, Canada and moved to Atlanta with her family when
she was 6 years old.

Kristin completed her undergraduate degree at Georgia Tech in 2012. She is
currently pursuing her law degree at the University of Georgia School of
Law. She will graduate in May of 2015 and has plans to take the Georgia Bar
Exam in July of 2015.

When Kristin is not in the law library (an increasingly rare and momentous
occasion), she enjoys a range of extra curricular activities including ballet,
running, classical piano, and trying new recipes. She also enjoys spending
time working as a Court-Appointed Special Advocate for Children for the
Athens-Oconee Judicial Circuit.

Kristin is passionate about her faith, traveling the world, learning
languages, eating new foods, meeting new people, reading, geopolitics, various
cultures, and photography. She is an unabashed proponent of the Oxford comma,
a Francophile/Francophone/Franco-most-things, and lover of all things curious,
puzzling, or debatable.

James is the son of Jim and Diana Malcolm. He grew up in the DC area before
coming to Georgia for high school in Augusta and college at Georgia Tech in
Atlanta.

After completing graduate studies at Georgia Tech, James worked in the
software industry for a few years before starting medical school at Emory
University in the fall of 2013.

James enjoys all things related to the great outdoors as well as living in the
midtown area.

His parents, younger sister Jennifer, and puppy, Jake, all live in the metro
Atlanta area. His younger brother John currently attends college in upstate
New York.
