---
title: "Clerkships"
description: "What to pack, what to study, and how to do your best on rotations."
layout: post
tags:
- medicine
---

## Every rotation

Equipment:

* **Two pens.** Be prepared to give one away.
* **Pen light.** Strong focused beam.  Useful not just for pupil exams but
  also examining a patient in a dim room.
* **Stethoscope.** Nearly ever specialty will use this except psych.
* **Notecards.** A small stack of blanks in your top pocket that you can whip
  out to write down anything at a moment's notice.  Often you're asked on the
  spot to call a number for a consult; you don't want to be fumbling for your
  phone to take down the number.  I often have one card per patient to write
  down details like meds or important H&P details. For ICU rotations and more
  complicated patients, you may need larger blank paper or
  [scutsheets](http://www.medfools.com/downloads.php), but still keep some
  notecards handy for little things.

Surgery likely doesn't need your stethoscope.  Psych probably doesn't need
anything beyond pens; leave your tie and white coat at home so a patient
doesn't strangle you or get intimidated.  An ophthalmoscope is handy on
consult services where you're unlikely to have tools handy.

Graduate from Wikipedia to [UpToDate.com](//uptodate.com).  This is the most
well-organized resource I've found for efficient, practical, and comprehensive
research on topics encountered in clinical medicine.  Hopefully your school
provides you with a subscription.

**Set some goals.** Before you hit the floors on day #1, come up with a list
of 2-3 things you want to get better at on this rotation.  For example, if
you're interested in cardiology, you can always say you want to get better at
listening to hearts whether it's a pediatrics or adult medicine.  Having a
ready answer shows you're a self starter, and it primes you to get more out of
the opportunities that come up.

**Have the calendar in your head.** Someone is invariably going to ask you how
long you're rotating with them, or what you're doing next.  Replying "I don't
know" makes you look aimless.  Know your dates.  What's more, I like to
solicit feedback at the halfway point so I have room to improve on anything
attendings note.  The day before the halfway point, I'll mention to the
attending that I'd appreciate if there was an opportunity for some feedback
the next day.


## Get comfortable with chaos

No longer are you lumped in with hundreds of other students all going through
lectures and exercises in lock step.  You'll often be adrift, alone on a ward
somewhere.  For much of this year you'll spend your time wondering if you're
where you're supposed to be.  The second half of medical school is much less
organized than the first half.

Get used to messing up on your first swing.  You'll daily feel fumbling and
incompetent.  The important thing is that you learn quickly.  Attendings and
residents expect that you'll fumble the first day or so, but if you're making
the same mistakes day after day, expect low ratings.

You no longer have infinite time to study at your own pace.  You must now more
than ever prioritize what to cover and how deeply to cover it.


## Examining patients

**Always introduce yourself.** For inpatients, introduce yourself again each
day until it's clear they know you.  Always knock before entering.  Recognize
that patients have lost control or privacy, so knocking and requesting to
enter is one way to give some of that back.

**Minimal exposure.** While you need to examine head to toe, you don't have to
expose them all at once.  Keep as much covered as possible as you're going
along.


## Presenting on rounds

**Gather the information.** Before diving into the digital records, ask the
night staff if there were any updates.  I tend to check the medical records
before examining the patient; this might provide overnight clues that will
guide my physical exam.  Sometimes you might want to briefly glance at the
patient to get basic vitals and then come back later for a thorough exam.
When examining a patient in the wee hours of the morning, be nice: use your
penlight as much as possible instead of flipping on the overhead lights.

**Put together the story.** Use only 50% of the data, but be prepared if asked
about the other 50%.  Giving 100% of the details in an unorganized fashion
forces the attending to work at making sense of the situation.  Don't fall
into the trap of being proud of yourself that you were able to spew out all
kinds of detailed data rapid fire.  Better to tell a logical story at normal
rate.

**H&P versus SOAP.** On inpatient services, you present new patients
differently than ones that have been on your service a night or two.  New
patients need a full H&P that includes the history of how they got to your
service so everyone's on the same page (eg. emergency department course).
From the second day onward, you report using a SOAP note only highlighting
overnight events, new lab values, and plan changes.


## Neurology

**Pregame.** Specific equipment for the physical exam:  reflex hammer, tuning
fork, safety pins, ophthalmoscope. Practice your complete neuro exam.  Review
anti-epileptic drugs for seizure control and pain management, calcium channel
blockers for treating vasospasm, beta blockers for lowing blood pressure, and
anesthetics.  Get familiar with one of the [NIH Stroke Scale apps][stroke].

  [stroke]: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/10-second-stroke-scale/id478624302?mt=8

**Shelf.** About 200 questions in UWorld and 500 in
[Neurology Pre-Test][]. I've heard [Neurology Clinical Cases][] is good but I
had my hands full with UWorld and Pre-Test.  From UWorld, consider also
including ophthalmology.  The [NBME] subject tests were a closer approximation
to the actual shelf exam, but since the NBME tests don't have explanations,
the UWorld and Pre-Test explanations were still necessary.

[Neurology Pre-Test]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0071761144/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0071761144&linkCode=as2&tag=jgmalcolm-20&linkId=ZYVMQGEVHO36UUO3
[Neurology Clinical Cases]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0071761705/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0071761705&linkCode=as2&tag=jgmalcolm-20&linkId=HHAGQO35U4AM2TYM
[NBME]: https://nsas.nbme.org/home


## Pediatrics

**Pre-game.** Kids are not like adults, so print out some reference material
for developmental milestones, a [template review of systems][peds-ros] so you
hit on pediatric-specific questions during your H&Ps, and watch some videos of
the [pediatric physical exam][peds-pe], carry around a template
[checklist][peds-pe-checklist] and try to hit more of it with each new exam.
Newborns labs have their own range of normal; get familiar with heart rate,
respiratory rate, >37C is febrile in a neonate.  Get a basic outline of how to
workup common problems: respiratory distress, [neonatal jaundice][jaundice],
fever of unknown origin, etc.

  [jaundice]: http://www.meddean.luc.edu/lumen/MedEd/peds/newborn_pe_exercise.pdf
  [peds-ros]: http://www.utmb.edu/pedi_ed/CORE/Neonatology/page_02.htm
  [peds-pe]: http://www.utmb.edu/pedi_ed/CORE/Neonatology/page_11.htm
  [peds-pe-checklist]: http://www.meddean.luc.edu/lumen/MedEd/peds/newborn_pe_exercise.pdf

**Pediatric H&Ps are not adult H&Ps.** If a child is in the first decade of
life, you should ask about birth history, feeding, development.  Carry a
reference sheet with developmental milestones and, for their age, ask about
the four areas.

**CLIPP Cases.** Available from [MedU](//www.med-u.org/clipp).  These cover
about 30 basic scenarios you'll encounter daily.  Do a quick pass in the first
week of your rotations so you're familiar with the content.  Then do a
subsequent slower pass to truly study the material before the shelf.

**Handle with care.** You'll find they're pretty resilient.  I doubt you'll
drop a child, but another important aspect of handling with care involves
diaper mishaps.  During your physical exam, always position the diaper over a
little boy's private parts.  The time when you have them fully exposed should
be on the order of seconds.  When checking femoral pulses, shields up.
Further, before picking a child up to coddle, check the diaper.  Your clothes
will quickly soak up a wet diaper.  This is experience talking.  For Peds,
OB/Gyn, and Surgery you'll want to have a full change of scrubs in your locker
or car.

**Nursery.** The newborn physical exam looks for specific physical findings
from the birth process: birth trauma and deformities from in utero
positioning, skin findings such as umbilical site, jaundice, rashes, etc.
Your history will need to assess this pregnancy and delivery as well as
previous pregnancies.  Know jaundice and respiratory distress cold.  Normal
vitals are unique in the first few days.


## Medicine

**Pre-game.** Review EKG readings.

**Shelf.** UWorld is all you need to do well.  Absolutely do all 1300
questions.  [MKSAP] is great but extra.


  [MKSAP]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1934465542/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1934465542&linkCode=as2&tag=jgmalcolm-20&linkId=5LTX75SLT7D62FSF

{% comment %}




http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/2a04dl/part_2_m3_year_resources_to_use_to_excel_on_your/
http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/1wt931/m3_year_resources_to_use_to_excel_on_your_nbmes/
http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/1u6pko/dr_usmle_or_how_i_learned_to_stop_worrying_and/
https://docs.google.com/a/jgmalcolm.com/document/d/1J4LsAtl5NHjskCv0lbXxUMY16lBlAiRHuBRP0ZKGmqo/edit


http://www.uwmedicine.org/education/Documents/md-program/AOA%20Pearls_2013-14_4_MS-4%20Advice.pdf


## Surgery

http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/2vanpe/faq_for_matching_in_general_surgery/
http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/2vcroj/tips_and_tricksresources_for_the_surgery_clerkship/

{% endcomment %}
