---
title: "Memorize Anything"
layout: post
description: "Simple steps to memorize anything using your visual, spatial, and emotional memory."
series: STEP1
tags: [studying, STEP1]
keywords: [memory palace, memory scene, method of loci]
---

Did you ever need to memorize a table of facts for some test?  Tired of
reading and rereading through the table hoping the information will somehow
stick?  This article outlines simple steps for building "memory scenes" that
leverage your visual, spatial, and emotional memory.

{% include series.html %}

## Simple

**Start with a unifying theme.** Come up with a consistent theme for all your
objects in the scene that relates to your overall topic.  For example, a
period in time (Renaissance) or a location (local diner).  This common theme
will reinforce the connections binding all your symbols together.  Setting a
scene also makes it easier to come up with individual symbols.

For example, if you recall that the entire scene was set in a farm field but
you're forgetting one area, you have a better chance of narrowing it down as
you try to recall common farm objects likely present.  If the scene had been
too ridiculous and involved completely unrelated objects, then good luck.
You're screwed.  It's very easy to forget a symbol that's unattached to
anything else.

**What immediately pops into your head?** When you repeat the word or fact to
yourself, what is the first thing that comes to mind?  Run with that natural
association.

{% comment %}
penicillin = pencil
{% endcomment %}

**Stew on it.** If nothing immediately comes to mind, don't be afraid to mull
around for a while until you find something that really fits.  Play with the
word some.  Roll it around in your mouth.  Pronounce it in various ways.  Look
for a synonym.  Use a dictionary to find other words that begin with the same
first few letters.  Instead of representing the word directly, represent a key
fact about the concept.  For example, to represent Calcium, you could use Milk
or a Cow.

**Trigger off most characteristic syllable.** Unless every syllable is
important, just use the one with most emphasis.

**Use easily recognizable objects.** If the object is too complicated or
unusually decorated, it might get blurred in your visual memory.  Use dynamic
action to make things memorable.

**Stark contrasts.** Avoid weak or qualitative differences between contrasting
objects.  Symbols should be either huge or tiny, incredibly strong or
laughably scrawny.  Contrasting objects should be near enough that the
differences are obvious.

**Only include salient features.** Ignore details in the initial stages.  As
you become an expert in a topic, the details just naturally associate with the
topic in your mind.  There is less need to fit them in at the beginning of
scene formation.

**Avoid multiple associations per object.** Aim for a 1-to-1 mapping between
symbols and facts.  You may think you're clever with one object representing
three facts, but it's easy to forget when there's a list.

**Consistency.** Aim for all your facts to be roughly the same size.  If some
of your objects are huge and some are tiny, your mind's eye may be overwhelmed
by the huge objects and forget all the tiny details.

**Avoid clutter.** Too many symbols and they'll mush together.  Spread them
out.  Split it up into multiple scenes, and reuse some symbols to link the
scenes.  Also avoid putting in unnecessary detail: don't put anything in the
scene that doesn't actually represent a fact.



## Vivid pictures

**Visceral and emotional.** In order to get as many brain cells firing as
possible, you need to evoke visceral or emotional reactions.  Gross blood,
smelly fish, painful wounds, a deflated ego, a guilty conscience, an
attractive person.

**Dynamic scenes.** Use action to get your attention.  A bunch of independent,
static objects can become a fragmented blur.  A bunch of interactive objects
and moving actors will stick.

**Make it real to you.** Walk around it to see it from all sides.  Push
something around.  Focus on details.  Smell, taste, and touch.


{% comment %}

## Sequences

* Sequences require a "memory palace" to provide order.
* A very familiar location (home, school)
  * Separate rooms and physical space to avoid crowding
  * Aim for about five objects per a space.
* Spend time walking through this space and examining the "stopping spots"
  where you will later place objects.

https://litemind.com/memory-palace/
http://www.artofmanliness.com/2011/09/30/how-to-memorize-anything-you-want-a-quick-primer-on-mental-mapping/



## Numbers
  * In [Mnemonic Major System][wiki] each digit maps to a unique consonant.
    To remember a sequence of digits, start with the consonants mapped from
    each digit and form a memorable word by adding vowels as needed.

[wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mnemonic_major_system


{% endcomment %}

## Getting faster

There is an up-front cost of time spent generating a scene, but I've found
that I don't have to restudy material which saves me time overall.  Even more,
as I've practiced constructing scenes, the process has become faster.  I'm
faster now at coming up with symbols, associations, and an integrated scene.
Reusing symbols from previous scenes reinforces those same associations.

Spaced repetition is an efficient algorithm for scheduling when to revisit a
weak topic, but it does nothing to help you when you're actually trying to
absorb the specific topic material.  Sometimes I felt like I was getting hit
in head with a hammer repeatedly every time I encountered the same topic day
after day, each time unable to actually absorb and assimilate the details for
any meaningful retention.

Spend time reviewing and interacting with your mental scenes.  Close your eyes
and walk through them.  As you review, reach out to touch every object to make
it real, as if you're there in the scene.
