---
title: "'What drugs are you on?'"
layout: post
tags:
- medschool
- BaD
---

Medications are a key part of taking a patient history.  While I never say it
the way the title has it, here's some tips and tricks I've learned to get all
the facts.

<em>Note: I'm a medical student in Atlanta, and this post is part of a series
on "Becoming a Doctor" (more to come).  These posts in no way constitute
medical advice.  Consult your doctor.</em>

I typically start with:

> "What medications are you currently taking?"

Meds often give you a list of the patient's diseases, but often meds become so
routine that patients omit one or two when you ask.  For example, synthroid,
aspirin, and statins are often left off the list because a patient has been
taking them for as long as they can remember.  Patients are more apt to report
something they started taking a few months ago, not the med they've been
taking for 10 years.

So this is often just a good start, but the next three questions will help
make sure you have all the information.


> "What pills do you put in your mouth every day?"

Restating it this way often shakes out one or two loose meds.  Also go beyond
pills and prescriptions:  herbals, over the counter, vitamins, supplements.

Sidebar: pre-natal vitamins pack a powerful punch of vitamins and minerals
which can interfere with the absorption of other medications like insulin, so
taking them at the same time could bind the insulin rendering it ineffective.
Solution: take one in the morning and the other at night.

Just having the list is not enough.  For every med on that list, you need two
more things: why are they taking the pill, are they actually taking the pill.

> "Why are you taking that?"

Meds have off-label uses or can be used to treat multiple disorders.  Don't
just assume that because the patient is on synthroid that they have
hypothyroidism -- they could have had a thyroid removed due to cancer.

> "Are you actually taking it?"

So many patients are ill simply because they're skipping doses.  How many
doses do you miss in a typical month?  A patient may be taking meds for
hypertension, but you find their blood pressure is elevated that morning
because they skipped today's dose.  Side:  a high blood pressure reading on a
medicated hypertensive patient can be a good indication of non-compliance.
Often patients simply forget, so walk them through some strategies to
remember: pill boxes, rituals (at breakfast, when setting alarm at night, in
car while commuting), or multiple pill caches for when you forgot and you've
already left the house.


Any tips you use?
