---
title: "Clerkships"
description: "Make the most of your time on the wards."
layout: post
tags:
- medicine
---

## Every rotation

Equipment: several pens (be prepared to give them away), pen light, note
cards, stethoscope, [scutsheets](http://www.medfools.com/downloads.php).

Surgery likely doesn't need your stethoscope.  Psych probably doesn't need
anything beyond pens; leave your tie and white coat at home so a patient
doesn't strangle you or get intimidated.  An ophthalmoscope is handy on
consult services where you're unlikely to have tools handy.

Ditch Wikipedia for [UpToDate.com](//uptodate.com).  This is the most
well-organized resource I've found for efficient, practical, and comprehensive
research on topics encountered in clinical medicine.


## Presenting on rounds

**Gather the information.** Before diving into the digital records, ask the
night staff if there were any updates.  I tend to check the medical records
before examining the patient; this might provide overnight clues that will
guide my physical exam.  Sometimes you might want to briefly glance at the
patient to get basic vitals and then come back later for a thorough exam.

**Put together the story.** Use only 50% of the data, but be prepared if asked
about the other 50%.  Giving 100% of the details in an unorganized fashion
forces the attending to work at making sense of the situation.  Don't fall
into the trap of being proud of yourself that you were able to spew out all
kinds of detailed data rapid fire.  Better to tell a logical story at normal
rate.


## Neurology

**Pregame.** Specific equipment for the physical exam:  reflex hammer, tuning
fork, safety pins, ophthalmoscope. Practice your complete neuro exam.  Review
anti-epileptic drugs for seizure control and pain management, calcium channel
blockers for treating vasospasm, beta blockers for lowing blood pressure, and
anesthetics.

**Shelf.** About 200 questions in UWorld and 500 in
[Neurology Pre-Test][]. I've heard [Neurology Clinical Cases][] is good but I
had my hands full with UWorld and Pre-Test.  From UWorld, consider also
including ophthalmology.




## Pediatrics

http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/2a04dl/part_2_m3_year_resources_to_use_to_excel_on_your/
http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/1wt931/m3_year_resources_to_use_to_excel_on_your_nbmes/
http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/1u6pko/dr_usmle_or_how_i_learned_to_stop_worrying_and/
https://docs.google.com/a/jgmalcolm.com/document/d/1J4LsAtl5NHjskCv0lbXxUMY16lBlAiRHuBRP0ZKGmqo/edit


http://www.uwmedicine.org/education/Documents/md-program/AOA%20Pearls_2013-14_4_MS-4%20Advice.pdf


## Surgery

http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/2vanpe/faq_for_matching_in_general_surgery/
http://www.reddit.com/r/medicalschool/comments/2vcroj/tips_and_tricksresources_for_the_surgery_clerkship/
