---
layout: post
title: "PGY1"
description: "Intern year"
tags: [medicine, clinical]
---

**ICU Upgrades.** Anyone who you get worried about to the point of doing
frequent checks, consider transfer to ICU. Don't rely on nursing staff to
report back. Don't rely on yourself to keep checking; you may get pulled into
something else.

**Exam changes.** Always report them up. But before you do: examine the
patient yourself, come up with your own assessment and plan, and then go to a
senior. Practice that.


## Consults

**LESON.**

  figure...

**What is the question?** Why are you being called to see a patient? Do we
need any imaging or labs before we can answer? Keep in mind that the
requesting service is asking for help. They either don't know the answer or
don't feel comfortable. Don't blow them off. Use it as a moment to share
knowledge. If it wasn't appropriate to be consulted, then teach the proper
indications and workup to avoid a future repeat. If missing workup, explain
how this impacts your getting answers.

**Close the loop.** Instead of just dropping a consult note silently, call
them back to summarize recommendations and answer any questions.  Ask for a
good callback number.



## Night float

When leaving hospital in morning, if you're planning to sleep, take 3mg
melatonin to kick start your sleep cycle by the time you get home.

**Zombie tasks.** When coming off an odd shift, my mind is in a fog. I cannot
do creative work; however, I can execute basic tasks. I keep a todo list with
very straight forward tasks and errands I could execute while my brain is
foggy.

**Sleeping.** Bring toothbrush / paste, deoderant. Sleep on your back to avoid
greasy/messy hair, puffy eyes, and pillow lines on your face.
