---
title: "USMLE Step 1"
layout: post
tags: [Step1, studying, medicine]
description: "Your first two years of med school...judged by one test"
---

Not sure what all is going through your mind, but your STEP1 score is not a
make-or-break score.  Do your best and move on to the next set of hurdles.
Your ERAS is a combination of scores, letters, grades, and research.  You only
need 2+ of those to get an interview, and after that it's more personality
than raw numbers.

I would definitely prioritize UWorld over Kaplan. Absolutely finish UWorld and
the two self assessments. Mark good questions and come back for a fast second
pass on those marked ones.

Only use Kaplan for extra questions in your weak areas. Even then, probably
best to repeat UW questions in those areas. But if you find you've memorized
the UW answers for those, then try Kaplan.

My NBME tests ranged, so having two hit similar doesn't say much. I did 5 NBME
and the 2 UW-SA. My scores ranged from 234-261 over the course of 10 days.

I would focus only in the last 10-14 days on timing. Until then, use un-timed
mode to go slowly and really think through questions and work on your
technique and thoroughly flesh out a process that works for you. Accuracy
before speed.

Ask yourself "Why did I get that wrong?" Really try to parse that out. Did you
misread? Did you over think? Were you able to see what the test writers were
going for? Did you narrow it down and guess wrong? Were you jumping at a
distractor? Did you narrow it down and give up and just guess? Did you simply
not have the requisite knowledge to answer? Did you rule out the correct
answer and, if so, why? Or was the correct answer still among the ones you did
not cross out?

Only use Pathoma where you need review. Don't simply plod through it. Goljan
however is really good to listen. I hit the treadmill an hour each day for
*focused* listening to one Goljan session each day. I swear, nearly every day
I got a question correct only because I had just heard that man talk about it.


Ultimately keep in mind that this test doesn't define who you are. It's
ridiculous how much pressure is placed on this one test value and faculty I
talk with say it's only one piece of a small puzzle.

If you know what you want to do, it's the things you do week after week after
week that get you there. Research, relationships, work ethic on
sub-internships, etc that get you in. Step1 is just one number they might use
to screen. They don't compare people like "student A is 225 versus Student B
who is 235"....no. The competitive programs compare based on letters and
research and relationships.


Do questions. That's the biggest thing you can do now that will effect your
grade. Stop undirected review and only do spot review. By now you should have
a pretty good idea of what you're weak in. Spend time there just memorizing
tables by rote so you stop bleeding points.

In your last week, focus on timing. Get closer to simulating the full test
experience. Start doing questions at the same time your exam will begin on
test day. Practice the marathon portion. Aim for 150-200 questions per day so
you start to understand your personal psychology when fatigued. Get some
experience working through that.

Something I wished I had allowed more time for: rest before the exam. Do <10
questions the day before the exam. You need to restore your energy before
walking in there.

Always keep in mind that this one test does not define you and that, if you
have dreams, you can always find a way to achieve them.


As with anything, ask yourself "Why am I getting these wrong?"

If it's that you don't have the base knowledge, then it's rote study time
that's needed. Practice questions themselves can beat the information into
you. But if you're consistently missing because of inadequate content, then
best to pause and really dig into that area...instead of continuing to bleed
points.

For second guessing yourself, maybe you're overthinking it. Try asking
yourself a different question: what is the tester trying to get after? What
are they trying to test me on? It might make the question unfold simpler than
it seems. Maybe you're overthinking to make it more complicated.

For the questions about study bias and such, probably simply doing lots of
questions would be good. You'll get familiar with the tested aspects.

For example, time on calculation questions was an issue for me, so I liked to
leave these questions till the end of the block when I didn't feel as much
pressure to move along and didn't fall into the trap of blowing a lot of
time. Just straight skipped them when I hit them. Don't even guess. Come back
when you have time. As you get really good in the last week or so, you'll
start having more time at the end to review and do those. Leave them to the
end when you have less feeling of pressure like you need to move on.

For anatomy, you only need FA. BRS is too dense at this point. I recall that
most questions centered around the following:

-- Innervation of the lower extremity (tibial, common peroneal/fibular,
   anterior compartment, typically a tackle or injury just below the knee).

-- brachial plexus. Know this cold. Draw that diagram 5x at moderate
   detail. Know a few muscle innervations off that, winged scapula,
   thoracodorsal.

-- collateral blood supply of the stomach.


Watch the video playlist I made. Video links are on my website. That should
cover relevant MSK.

--- Portal hypertension anastomoses. There are only three so make a simple
    table and memorize. Most often it was the esophageal varices.

-- rotator cuff muscles. SItS and their movement. Innervations not very
   important.

The above should cover 80% of anatomy. Does that sound right or am I
forgetting some big topics?


Maybe, as an exercise, try to tell me more about what you're missing? Do you
narrow it down and then guess wrongly? Are you falsely confident in your
answers?


Don't sweat the TA background. We're constantly cramming new info in one end
and stuff falls out the other. I'm betting you're actually really really good
at clinical anatomy and will have a better foundation in it because of your TA
experience than a classmate who is good at NBME style questions. These
multiple choice exams are so contrived. What you did in TA lab is likely more
real world.

Make sure to do these NBME tests under test conditions. Start at 8am. Consider
doing 8-10 warm up questions before. Take the appropriate breaks. Get to know
yourself and how you're going to work through fatigue when it hits you. Better
to learn how to handle yourself now than wrestle with this on test day.
