---
layout: post
title: "Step 2"
description: "What to study and how to study it."
tags: [medicine, studying]
---


Don't assume or read too much into questions.  They will give you all the
relevant positives and negatives.  If a finding is not present and you know
it's critical, then that's probably a clue.

Syndromes.  Given all the positive symptoms, does it resemble a syndrome?

Look for excesses.  If the person is a 2 pack per day smoker for 40 years,
then you better be thinking lung cancer.  If the person is just a half pack
for the last ten years, then while still a possibility, it's less dramatic.

Question stems.
- "Most common cause..." - there may be multiple possible but less likely distractors.
- "Next step..." or "Initial management" -- Patient has a lump in their
  thyroid.  Yes it might be cancer and might have metastasized, but before you
  order that full body PET scan, do a needle aspiration to first diagnose it.

**Dominant symptoms.** What's the chief complaint?  Never forget that and
don't get distracted by minor symptoms four sentences in.

## Test Bank Strategy

**First pass: topical.** While you went through your clerkship rotations, you
likely already did select UWorld questions.  Now as you begin your dedicated
study time, start by creating blocks all from the same topic, eg. Surgery,
Medicine/Renal, Micro.  The purpose is so in the same stream of questions you
will keep hitting the same topics and start to see the similarities and clues.
You'll keep reinforcing things.  After you've completed the question bank this
way, then start doing random.  If you had started random, it would have felt
like you were getting bunched from a dozen directions at once, and you'll
retain less.  The goal at this stage is not to simulate test day; the goal is
to learn.

**Prioritize your weaknesses.** Go where the money is at.  Given any UWorld
performance data you gathered while going through clerkships, first do
questions on your weakest areas.  Keep going until you've completed the qbank.

**Second pass: random.** Now that you've completed all questions once during
clerkships and the start of this dedicated period, you should now begin random
blocks.
