---
title: "How to write medical research papers"
description: "How to get organized, define your scope, and not get bogged down."
tags: [medicine,research]
---


## Get Organized

Google Docs for collaboration.


## Scope

If you're finding a lot of papers reporting on the question, then you're
likely on a valuable topic.

Lumpers and splitters.



## Avoid getting bogged down

**Don't read into things too much.** Not every paper will report on every
variable you're interested in.  If the paper doesn't record an outcome measure
that you're looking for, then move on.  You don't have time to wade through
their raw data and make your own interpretations.  Only record what they
record so you stay unbiased.  There's always a balance, but as much as
possible, you need to "delegate" and rely on their clinical assessment.

**Focus on one thing at a time.** After you skim a few related papers on your
topic, you should have an idea on what are the main risk factors,
complications, or whatever else all the papers make a fuss about.  Take a pass
through all papers and just focus on this one variable so you develop
judgment.  You'll flounder if you try to go through every paper and record
every single detail into twenty different columns.  You'll quickly get lost in
the minutia.  As you're reading papers, it's easy to go down rabbit trails
with new references you've not yet seen; you should put those in a separate
list for later.



# Data Analysis

[RevMan]: http://tech.cochrane.org/revman


# Writing

**Methods.** Write this section first.  It should be the most straight
forward: you're just documenting what you did.  Look at other papers to see
what is important to document and in what order.  Follow the
[PRISMA](http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000100) formula, but don't
get too bogged down with all the details; do as much as you can and move on.
No study hits all points but you should aim for something like 60-70% of the
items.

**Introduction.** Make this brief, like two paragraphs.  First paragraph is
broad strokes introducing the topic and a few notable works.  Second paragraph
motivates your work: what question are you seeking to answer?  You must have a
good motivation, not simply "Previous studies suck. I could do better."

**Discussion.** Break it into sections for each of the topics.  For each
topic, highlight papers that found significant findings, even if you
ultimately found no significance.  Don't spend time on things that were not
significant.  This is an opportunity to highlight the signal among all the
noise.

{% comment %}

- OR vs RR
  - when to use
  - examples for practice

{% endcomment %}
